chore(doc): added section on copy command to "Importing data in bulk … (#967)
questdb/questdb.io: docs/guides/importing-data.md

This guide describes the method of migrating data to QuestDB via CSV files. For the time being this is the only way to get the existing data into QuestDB

## Prepare the import

Preparation is the key. Import is a multi-step process, which consists of:
- exporting the existing database as CSV
- enabling and configuring `COPY` command to be optimal for your system
- preparing target schema in QuestDB

### Export existing database

Export data using one CSV file per table. Make sure to export a column, which can be used as timestamp. Data in CSV is not expected to be in any particular order. If it is not possible to export table as one CSV, export multiple files and concatenate these files before importing into QuestDB.

### Understand the QuestDB import

Importing CSV file is disabled by default, in order not to expose the host file system to potential attackers. Import can be enabled by configuring the target disk using the `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting.

The `COPY` command works more efficiently when source and target disks are different.
The import operation attempts to sort CSV file by timestamp on the source disk and can benefit from SSD with large number of IOPS.

> To optimize performance, it is preferable to place the input CSV file on a high-IOPS disk (especially, if the file is unordered); otherwise, import may slow down while doing random requests for each input row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To optimize performance, it is preferable to place the input CSV file on a high-IOPS disk (especially if the file is unordered); otherwise, import may slow down while doing random requests for each input row.
```

For third-party cloud providers, the fastest source option for the import is an NVMe SSD.

- [`COPY`](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) outlines more details for parallel and serial import.

> :::info

Reviewer 2: we don't need "info" emphasis here

- Importing into existing partitioned tables containing data is not yet supported. Import can only target blank tables. Please vote for the existing [GH issue](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/issues/2409) if you'd like new feature to be added to support importing files into existing, non-blank tables. 
- It may also be possible to create tables by setting `commitLag` and `maxUncommittedRows` via
REST API using the `/imp` endpoint. This is suitable for importing smaller tables. See [Importing data via REST API](/docs/guides/importing-data-rest) for more information.

:::

> ### Configure QuestDB settings

Reviewer 2: ### Configure `COPY`

> ### Configure QuestDB settings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Configure `COPY`
```

Import expects files to reside in directory pointed to by the `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting (not set by default), and can be edited as part of the [configuration](/docs/reference/configuration).
This location is also used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions. It is possible to choose a different temporary storage location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.

To get the best performance, temporary import files (governed by `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting) should be set to the same filesystem as the database data files.
If `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` is not set to the same directory as the database data files, QuestDB has to copy the temporary data files to move partitions instead of changing the file location, and therefore the operations is likely to be slowed down.

> See [`COPY` configuration settings](/docs/reference/configuration#bulk-csv-import) for all the configuration options.

Reviewer 2: Lets remove this entire section and replace it with:

Enable `COPY` via [configuration](/docs/reference/configuration#bulk-csv-import).

> To get best performance, temporary import files (governed by `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting) should be set to the same filesystem as the database data files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For optimal performance, temporary import files (governed by `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting) should be set to the same filesystem as the database data files.
```

> ## Create the table schema

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Create the target table schema
```

> Once the source data is exported and QuestDB configuration is set, the user can start an import.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the source data is exported and QuestDB configuration is set, we can start an import.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: For example, create smaller file:

```bash
head -100000 my_table.csv > my_table_small.csv
```

> QuestDB analyzes input file, detects schema and creates target table. However, there are elements that the CSV analysis cannot decide, e.g. which column should be of symbol type or indexed.

Reviewer: Analysis cannot decide: "Decide" is not precise nor clear, use something else

Therefore, we do not recommend importing CSV file directly to QuestDB. Instead, we recommend creating an empty target table using the right schema.

There are two options for creating the table schema:

> - Importing CSV file using a smaller table: Infer schema from data during dry-run using a smaller table repeatedly in order to modify the schema until all expectations are met.

Reviewer: "from data during dry-run" > this sounds a bit funky to me

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Importing CSV file using a smaller table: Infer schema from importing a smaller table repeatedly in order to modify the schema until all expectations are met.
```

> - Create table schema manually: This is useful when the user is familiar with QuestDB data types and understand how to translate existing database data types into QuestDB types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create table schema manually: This is useful when the user is familiar with QuestDB data types and understands how to translate existing database data types into QuestDB types.
```

> The following sections show steps to import an example unordered CSV file, `weather.csv`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections show steps to import the dataset `weather.csv`, which is an unordered CSV file:
```

    ```questdb-sql
    SELECT * FROM sys.text_import_log WHERE id = '5179978a6d7a1772' ORDER BY ts DESC; 
    ```

    |   ts                           |   id                |   table    |   file           |   phase  |   status    |   message  |   rows_handled  |   rows_imported  |   errors  |
    |--------------------------------|---------------------|------------|------------------|----------|-------------|------------|-----------------|------------------|-----------|
    |   2022-08-08T16:38:06.262706Z  |   5179978a6d7a1772  |   weather  |   test_file.csv  |          |   finished  |            |   999           |   999            |   0       |
    |   2022-08-08T16:38:06.226162Z  |   5179978a6d7a1772  |   weather  |   test_file.csv  |          |   started   |            |                 |                  |   0       |

    Check `rows_handled`, `rows_imported`, and `message` for any errors and amend the schema as required.

    5.2. Drop the table and re-import `test_file.csv` using the updated schema.
7. Repeat the steps to narrow down to a correct schema.
   The process may require either truncating: 

    ```questdb-sql
    TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;
    ```

>     or dropping of target table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    or dropping the target table:
```

tables. It should be used to migrate data from another database into QuestDB. This guide describes the method of
migrating data to QuestDB via CSV files. For the time being this is the only way to migrate data from other databases
into QuestDB.

:::note

This guide is applicable for QuestDB version 6.5 and higher.

:::

## Prepare the import

Preparation is key. Import is a multi-step process, which consists of:

- Export the existing database as CSV files
- Enable and configure `COPY` command to be optimal for the system
- Prepare target schema in QuestDB

### Export the existing database

Export data using one CSV file per table. Make sure to export a column, which can be used as timestamp. Data in CSV is
not expected to be in any particular order. If it is not possible to export table as one CSV, export multiple files and
concatenate these files before importing into QuestDB.

### Things to know about `COPY`

- `COPY` is disabled by default, as a security precaution. Configuration is required.

- `COPY` is more efficient when source and target disks are different.

- `COPY` is parallel when target table is partitioned.

> - `COPY` is _serial_ when target table is non-partitioned, out-of-order timestamps will be rejected

Reviewer 2: @amunra your understanding is correct, we don't support inserting out of order data into non-partitioned table _with timestamp_. Without timestamp - not a problem.

  ```shell
  head -1000 weather.csv > test_file.csv  
  ```

2. Use a simple `COPY` command to import `test_file.csv` and define the table name:

    ```questdb-sql
    COPY weather from 'test_file.csv' WITH HEADER true;
    ```

Table `weather` is created and it quickly returns an id of asynchronous import process running in the background:

| id               |
|------------------|
| 5179978a6d7a1772 |

3. In the Web Console right click table and select `Copy Schema to Clipboard` - this copies the schema generated by the
   input file analysis.

4. Paste the table schema to the code editor:

    ```questdb-sql
    CREATE TABLE 'weather' (
      timestamp TIMESTAMP,
      windDir INT,
      windSpeed INT,
      windGust INT,
      cloudCeiling INT,
      skyCover STRING,
      visMiles DOUBLE,
      tempF INT,
      dewpF INT,
      rain1H DOUBLE,
      rain6H DOUBLE,
      rain24H DOUBLE,
      snowDepth INT
    );
    ```

5. Identify the correct schema:

   5.1. The generated schema may not be completely correct. Check the log table and log file to resolve common errors

>    using the id (see also [Monitor the log](/docs/guides/importing-data/#monitoring-the-log)

Reviewer 4: Audit all links to ensure there is NO trailing backslash as this breaks crawling.

In other words, `/docs/guides/importing/data/#monitoring-the-log` should read `/docs/guides/importing/data#monitoring-the-log`

Reviewer 3: Fixed.

>    and [FAQ](/docs/guides/importing-data/#faq)):

Reviewer 4: Ditto here on the trailing slash: This creates a larger sitemap when crawled and de-ranks the pages.

2022-08-03T14:01:42.612302Z I i.q.c.t.CsvFileIndexer finished chunk [chunkLo=23099021813, chunkHi=26948858785, lines=29999792, errors=0]
2022-08-03T14:01:42.791789Z I i.q.c.t.CsvFileIndexer finished chunk [chunkLo=11549510915, chunkHi=15399347885, lines=30000011, errors=0]
```

Import into non-partitioned tables uses single threaded implementation that reports only start and finish records in
status table. Given an un-ordered CSV file `weather1mil.csv`, when importing, the log table shows:

| ts                          | id               | table             | file            | phase | status   | message | rows_handled | rows_imported | errors |
|:----------------------------|------------------|-------------------|-----------------|-------|----------|---------|--------------|---------------|--------|
| 2022-08-03T15:00:40.907224Z | 42d31603842f771a | weather_unordered | weather1mil.csv | null  | started  | null    | null         | null          | 0      |
| 2022-08-03T15:01:20.000709Z | 42d31603842f771a | weather_unordered | weather1mil.csv | null  | finished | null    | 999999       | 999999        | 0      |

> 

Reviewer 4: A new section for "Handling import errors". It should say what to do in case of errors.
* Does the whole need to be restarted from scratch?
* Can it be resumed?
* On data issues, is it possible to skip and write out bad data to a file so it can be corrected manually and re-inserted, say, via the REST API?
* What happens in a database crash or OS reboot? Will the table be there but partially written? Will the table be absent?
* How does one find the log file?

| cairo.sql.copy.max.index.chunk.size | 100MiB  | Maximum size of index chunk file used to limit total memory requirements of import . Indexing phase should use roughly threads_count * cairo.sql.copy.max.index.chunk.size  of memory .               |
| cairo.sql.copy.queue.capacity       | 32      | Size of copy task queue. Should be increased if there's more than 32 import workers .                                                                                                                 |
| cairo.sql.copy.root                 | null    | Input root directory for CSV imports via `COPY` SQL. This path should not overlap with other directory (e.g. db, conf) of running instance, otherwise import may delete or overwrite existing files . |
| cairo.sql.copy.work.root            | null    | Temporary import file directory . Same as cairo.sql.copy.root if not set explicitly.                                                                                                                  |

> | cairo.sql.copy.max.index.chunk.size | 100MiB  | Maximum size of index chunk file used to limit total memory requirements of import . Indexing phase should use roughly threads_count * cairo.sql.copy.max.index.chunk.size  of memory .               |

Reviewer 3: Should we list the property keys here only and add the details to the main config page?
https://questdb.io/docs/reference/configuration

Author: It might make sense to keep them in both places without user having to jump between pages . @bluestreak01  ?

Reviewer 3: Maybe create a separate table in config for bulk import settings, and link from the current guide to that section? Duplicating content is not the best practice...

                        
### Troubleshooting 

#### I'm getting "COPY is disabled ['cairo.sql.copy.root' is not set?]" error message 

Please set `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting, restart instance and try again .

#### I'm getting "could not create temporary import directory [path='somepath', errno=-1]" error message

Please make sure that both `cairo.sql.copy.root` and `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` are valid paths pointing to existing directories . 

> #### I'm getting "[2] could not open read-only [file=C:\path\to\import.csv]" error message

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### I'm getting "[1] could not open read-only [file=C:\path\to\import.csv]" error message
```

Reviewer 3: I mean, [1] is what I got...

Author: The error number within square brackets depends on the filesystem and could be any number .

                          
Please check that import file path is valid and accessible to QuestDB instance user.    

> 

Reviewer 3: Adding notes for Mac OS user: to save the file outside of /Users to avoid permission issues.

Author: Did you add something here ?

Reviewer 3: Added to COPY ref in [5692b75](https://github.com/questdb/questdb.io/pull/967/commits/5692b7545b3e22b16b8a4f8811c179033b498fed)

title: Importing data in bulk via CSV
sidebar_label: Bulk CSV imports
description:
  This document describes how to load large CSV data using COPY SQL keyword.
---

The [`COPY` SQL command](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) is the preferred way to import large (especially out-of-order) CSV files into partitioned tables.
It expects files to reside in directory pointed to by `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting (not set by default), and can be edited as part of the [configuration](/docs/reference/configuration).
This location is also used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions. It is possible to choose a different temporary storage location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.

:::info

- Importing into existing partitioned tables containing data is not yet supported. 

> - An ordered table may be created by setting `commitLag` and `maxUncommittedRows` via

Reviewer 5: What do we mean here by "ordered table"? The text also suggests that an "ordered table" can be only created via REST API?

REST API using the `/imp` endpoint. See [Importing data via REST API](/docs/guides/importing-data-rest) for more information.

:::

To optimize performance, it is preferable to save the input CSV file on separate high-IOPS disk (especially if the file is unordered);
otherwise, import may slow down while doing random requests for each input row.

> To get best performance, temporary import files (governed by `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting) should be set to the same filesystem as the database data files.

Reviewer 5: The previous paragraph started with "To optimize performance". This one starts with "To get best performance", so probably we can merge them.

#### I'm getting "timestamp column 'ts2' not found in file header" error message

Either input file is missing header or timestamp column name given in `COPY` command is invalid. 
Please add file header or fix timestamp option.                  

#### I'm getting "column is not a timestamp [no=0, name='ts']" error message 

Timestamp column given by the user or (if header is missing) assumed based on target table schema is of a different type.  
Please check timestamp column name in input file header or make sure input file column order matches that of target table.

#### I'm getting "target table must be empty [table=t]" error message 

`COPY` doesn't yet support importing into partitioned table with existing data. 

Please truncate table before re-importing with:

```questdb-sql
TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;
```
or import into another empty table and then use `INSERT INTO SELECT`:

```questdb-sql
INSERT batch 100000 commitLag 180s 
INTO table_name 
SELECT * FROM other_table;
```
to copy data into original target table.   

#### I'm getting "io_uring error" error message

It's possible that you've hit a IO_URING-related kernel error.   

> Please set `cairo.iouring.enabled` setting to false, restart QuestDB instance, and try again. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Please set `cairo.iouring.enabled` setting to `false`, restart QuestDB instance, and try again. 
```

                                                                                               
#### I'm getting "name is reserved" error message

The table you're trying import into is in bad state (metadata is incomplete). 

Please either drop the table with: 

```questdb-sql
DROP TABLE table_name;
```
and recreate the table or change the table name in the `COPY` command.

#### I'm getting "Unable to process the import request. Another import request may be in progress." error message
                                                                                                                 
Only one import can be running at a time. 

Either cancel running import with: 

```questdb-sql
COPY 'paste_import_id_here' CANCEL;
```

or wait until the current import is finished. 

#### Import finished but table is (almost) empty  

Please check the latest entries in log table:

```questdb-sql

> SELECT * FROM sys.text_import_log LIMIT -10; 

Reviewer 5: nit: we should suggest users to filter the table via a known import id instead of LIMIT -10

title: Importing data in bulk via CSV
sidebar_label: Bulk CSV imports
description:
  This document describes how to load large CSV data using COPY SQL keyword.
---

> The [`COPY` SQL command](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) is the preferred way to import large (especially out-of-order) CSV files into partitioned tables. This is the best way to migrate data from another database into QuestDB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`COPY` SQL command](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) is the preferred way to import large CSV files into partitioned tables. It should be used to migrate data from another database into QuestDB.
```

> This guide outlines the pre-requisites to use the command, and the configuration and steps to successfully import data into QuestDB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guide describes the method of migrating data to QuestDB via CSV files. For the time being this is the only way to get the existing data into QuestDB
```

> ## Preparing the import

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prepare the import
```

Reviewer 3: Already changed.

> This section outlines pre-requisites and considerations before starting an import.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Preparation is the key. Copy is a multi-step process, which consists of:
- exporting the existing database as CSV
- enabling and configuring `COPY` command to be optimal for your system
- preparing target schema in QuestDB
```

> ### Exporting existing database

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Export the existing database
```

> Ideally, each table in an existing database should be exported as one CSV file for the import. There is no limit to the size of the CSV file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Export data using one CSV file per table. Make sure you export a column, which can be used as timestamp. Data in CSV is not expected to be in any particular order. If it is not possible to export table as one CSV, you can export multiple and concatenate these files before importing into QuestDB.

Make sure you export somewhere, which is on fast network. Large CSV file will have to be copied to QuestDB instance.
```

Reviewer 3: The rest of the docs does not use "you" so I will re-write this to:
```suggestion
Export data using one CSV file per table. Make sure to export a column, which can be used as timestamp. Data in CSV is not expected to be in any particular order. If it is not possible to export table as one CSV, export multiple files and concatenate these files before importing into QuestDB.
```

> ### Understanding the QuestDB import

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Things to know about `COPY`
```

> Importing CSV file is disabled by default, in order not to expose the host file system to potential attackers. Import can be enabled by configuring the target disk using the `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `COPY` is disabled by default, as a security precaution. We are going to need to enable and configure it
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `COPY` is disabled by default, as a security precaution. Configuration is required.
```
Given that the configuration section is just below, I think we can leave it like the above.

> The `COPY` command works more efficiently when source and target disks are different.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `COPY` is more efficient when source and target disks are different.
```

> The import operation attempts to sort CSV file by timestamp on the source disk and can benefit from SSD with large number of IOPS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `COPY` indexes CSV file. This operation responds well to a disk with high IOPS. If source and target disks are different, faster source disk has the most impact. NVME source disk is the best option.
```

> To optimize performance, it is preferable to place the input CSV file on a high-IOPS disk (especially, if the file is unordered); otherwise, import may slow down while doing random requests for each input row.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this paragraph, it overlaps with the one above

> For third-arty cloud providers, the fastest source option for the import is NVME disks.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For third-party cloud providers, the fastest source option for the import is an NVMe SSD.
```

> For third-party cloud providers, the fastest source option for the import is an NVMe SSD.

Reviewer 2: and this one

> The [`COPY` SQL command](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) outlines more details for parallel and serial import.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`COPY`](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) outlines more details for parallel and serial import.
```

:::info

> - Importing into existing partitioned tables containing data is not yet supported. Import can only target blank tables. Please vote for the existing [GH issue](https://github.com/questdb/questdb/issues/2409) if you'd like new feature to be added to support importing files into existing, non-blank tables. 

Reviewer 2: Remove the "info" blurb, there is no need to emphasise one thing over the other. It is important user understand all information is this section
```suggestion
- `COPY` will only work when target table is blank or does not exist.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `COPY` only works when the target table is blank or does not exist.
```

> - It may also be possible to create tables by setting `commitLag` and `maxUncommittedRows` via

Reviewer 2: remove this section, it is confusing - we're focusing on "import" only, commit lag has nothing to do with it

Reviewer 3: Retaining the first point but deleting the second one.

Reviewer 2: what is "first" and "second" ?

:::

### Configuring QuestDB settings

Import expects files to reside in directory pointed to by the `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting (not set by default), and can be edited as part of the [configuration](/docs/reference/configuration).
This location is also used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions. It is possible to choose a different temporary storage location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.

To get best performance, temporary import files (governed by `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting) should be set to the same filesystem as the database data files.
If `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` is not set to the same directory as the database data files, QuestDB has to copy the temporary data files to move partitions instead of changing the file location, and therefore the operations is likely to be slowed down.

See [`COPY` configuration settings](/docs/reference/configuration#bulk-csv-import) for all the configuration options.

## Creating the table schema

Once the source data is exported and QuestDB configuration are set, the user can start an import.

> 

Author: 'input file analysis' doesn't create file but once could say that it's created in 'analyze_file_structure' import phase .
Maybe this would look better :
'QuestDB analyzes input file, detects schema and creates target table .`

- Create table schema manually: This is useful when the user is familiar with QuestDB data types and understand how to translate existing database data types into QuestDB types.

The following sections show steps to import an example unordered CSV file, `weather.csv`:

```shell title="weather.csv"
"locationId","timestamp","windDir","windSpeed","windGust","cloudCeiling","skyCover","visMiles","tempF","dewpF","rain1H","rain6H","rain24H","snowDepth"
1,"2010-07-05T00:23:58.981263Z",3050,442,512,,"OBS",11.774906006761,-5,-31,58.228032196984,70.471606345673,77.938252342637,58
2,"2017-10-10T10:13:55.246046Z",900,63,428,5487,"BKN",4.958601701089,-19,-7,4.328016420894,36.020659549374,97.821114441800,41
3,"2010-03-12T11:17:13.727137Z",2880,299,889,371,"BKN",10.342717709226,46,81,9.149518425127,20.229637391479,20.074738007931,80
4,"2018-08-21T15:42:23.107543Z",930,457,695,4540,"OBS",13.359184086767,90,-47,33.346163208862,37.501996055160,58.316836760009,13
...
```

If a timestamp column (`ts`) in this CSV file has a custom or non-standard

> timestamp format, this may be included with the call as follows:

Author: There are : missing before excerpts and . at end of sentences below .

Reviewer 3: Clarified the section is on ### Import CSV file using a smaller table and has updated it.

> 

Author: successful rate -> success rate ?

> 

Author: "Extract the first 1000 lines of the table" and 
"Extract from the large table a smaller dataset"
should mention file instead of table .

I feel one of them can be removed because they're almost the same .

      snowDepth INT
    );
    ```

5. Identify the correct schema:
  
    5.1. The generated schema may not be completely correct. Check the log table and log file to resolve common errors using the id (see also [Monitor the log](/docs/guides/importing-data#monitoring-the-log) and [Troubleshooting](/docs/guides/importing-data#troubleshooting))

    ```questdb-sql
    SELECT * FROM sys.text_import_log WHERE id = '5179978a6d7a1772' ORDER BY ts DESC; 
    ```

    |   ts                           |   id                |   table    |   file           |   phase  |   status    |   message  |   rows_handled  |   rows_imported  |   errors  |
    |--------------------------------|---------------------|------------|------------------|----------|-------------|------------|-----------------|------------------|-----------|
    |   2022-08-08T16:38:06.262706Z  |   5179978a6d7a1772  |   weather  |   test_file.csv  |          |   finished  |            |   999           |   999            |   0       |
    |   2022-08-08T16:38:06.226162Z  |   5179978a6d7a1772  |   weather  |   test_file.csv  |          |   started   |            |                 |                  |   0       |

> 

Author: Checking -> Check ?

    Checking `rows_handled`, `rows_imported`, and `message` for any errors and amend the schema as required.

    5.2. Drop the table and re-import `test_file.csv` using the updated schema

> 7. Repeat the steps to narrow down to a correct schema

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
7. Repeat the steps to narrow down to a correct schema.
```

   The process may require either truncating: 

    ```questdb-sql
    TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;
    ```
    or dropping of target table:

    ```questdb-sql
    DROP TABLE table_name;
    ```
8. Clean up: Once all the errors are resolved, copy the final schema, drop the small table
9. Ready for import: Create an empty table using the final schema.
                  
### Creating the target table manually

> If the user is familiar with QuestDB data type, the target table can be created manually:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If the user is familiar with QuestDB data types, the target table can be created manually:
```

```questdb-sql
CREATE TABLE weather (
  locationId INT,
  timestamp TIMESTAMP,
  windDir INT,
  windSpeed INT,
  windGust INT,
  cloudCeiling INT,
  skyCover SYMBOL,
  visMiles DOUBLE,
  tempF INT,
  dewpF INT,
  rain1H DOUBLE,
  rain6H DOUBLE,
  rain24H DOUBLE,
  snowDepth INT
) TIMESTAMP (timestamp) PARTITION BY MONTH;
```

## Importing the CSV file using the `COPY` command

Once an empty table is created in QuestDB using the correct schema, import can be initiated with: 

```questdb-sql
COPY weather FROM 'weather.csv' WITH HEADER true TIMESTAMP 'timestamp';
```

It quickly returns id of asynchronous import process running in the background:

| id               |
|:-----------------|
| 55020329020b446a |

> ## Monitoring the log

Reviewer 5: nit: Should we call it "Monitoring the import"?

2022-08-03T14:01:18.853212Z I i.q.c.t.ParallelCsvFileImporter finished [importId=5502031634e923b2, phase=boundary_check, file=`C:\dev\tmp\weather.csv`, duration=6s, errors=0]
2022-08-03T14:01:18.853303Z I i.q.c.t.ParallelCsvFileImporter started [importId=5502031634e923b2, phase=indexing, file=`C:\dev\tmp\weather.csv`, workerCount=10]
2022-08-03T14:01:18.853516Z I i.q.c.t.ParallelCsvFileImporter temporary import directory [path='E:\dev\tmp\weather\]
2022-08-03T14:01:42.612302Z I i.q.c.t.CsvFileIndexer finished chunk [chunkLo=23099021813, chunkHi=26948858785, lines=29999792, errors=0]
2022-08-03T14:01:42.791789Z I i.q.c.t.CsvFileIndexer finished chunk [chunkLo=11549510915, chunkHi=15399347885, lines=30000011, errors=0]
...
```

Import into non-partitioned tables uses single threaded implementation that reports only start and finish records in status table:   
    
| ts                          | id               | table             | file            | phase | status   | message | rows_handled | rows_imported | errors |
|:----------------------------|------------------|-------------------|-----------------|-------|----------|---------|--------------|---------------|--------|

> | 2022-08-03T15:00:40.907224Z | 42d31603842f771a | weather_unordered | weather1mil.csv | null  | started  | null    | null         | null          | 0      |

Reviewer 5: Where do `weather_unordered` and `weather1mil.csv` come from? All examples seem to use different table and file names.

Reviewer 3: Added more text to introduce an un-ordered table.

4,"2018-08-21T15:42:23.107543Z",930,457,695,4540,"OBS",13.359184086767,90,-47,33.346163208862,37.501996055160,58.316836760009,13
...
```

QuestDB can detect the target table schema and automatically create it based on input file analysis. The user can also manually input the schema. 
Inputting the schema manually is preferable, because there are elements that the CSV analysis cannot decide, e.g. which column should be of symbol type or indexed. Since changing schema of a large table after the import can be time-consuming, manually defining the schema has the benefit of inputting the correct setup and ensure successful import.

The target table can be created manually: 

```questdb-sql
CREATE TABLE weather (
locationId int,
timestamp TIMESTAMP,
windDir INT,
windSpeed INT,
windGust INT,
cloudCeiling INT,
skyCover SYMBOL capacity 256,
visMiles DOUBLE,
tempF INT,
dewpF INT,
rain1H DOUBLE,
rain6H DOUBLE,
rain24H DOUBLE,
snowDepth INT
) timestamp (timestamp) partition by MONTH;
```

Import can be initiated with: 

```questdb-sql
COPY weather FROM 'weather.csv' WITH HEADER true TIMESTAMP 'timestamp';
```

> It quickly returns a hexadecimal import id of asynchronous import process running in the background:

Author: import is repeated a bit later  in the same line so 'returns id of' should suffice .

```questdb-sql
select * from sys.text_import_log where id = '55020329020b446a'; 
```

| ts                          | id               | table   | file        | phase                  | status   | message | rows_handled | rows_imported | errors |
|:----------------------------|------------------|---------|-------------|------------------------|----------|---------|--------------|---------------|--------|
| 2022-08-03T14:00:40.907224Z | 55020329020b446a | weather | weather.csv | null                   | started  | null    | null         | null          | 0      |
| 2022-08-03T14:00:40.910709Z | 55020329020b446a | weather | weather.csv | analyze_file_structure | started  | null    | null         | null          | 0      |
| 2022-08-03T14:00:42.370563Z | 55020329020b446a | weather | weather.csv | analyze_file_structure | finished | null    | null         | null          | 0      |
| 2022-08-03T14:00:42.370793Z | 55020329020b446a | weather | weather.csv | boundary_check         | started  | null    | null         | null          | 0      |

Looking at the log from the newest to the oldest might be more convenient:  

```questdb-sql

> select * from sys.text_import_log where id = '55020329020b446a' order by ts desc 

Author: Why 'sys.text_import_log' ? It's not really correct sql . Did you mean "sys.text_import_log" ?

> select * from sys.text_import_log where id = '55020329020b446a' order by ts desc 

Reviewer 5: > It's not really correct sql

We support this flavor and tend to use it in the docs.

``` 

Once import successfully ends status table should contain row with 'null' phase and 'finished' status :

| ts                           | id               | table   | file        | phase | status   | message | rows_handled | rows_imported | errors |
|:-----------------------------|------------------|---------|-------------|-------|----------|---------|--------------|---------------|--------|
| 2022-08-03T14:10:59.198672Z  | 55020329020b446a | weather | weather.csv | null  | finished |         | 300000000    | 300000000     | 0      |
  

> Import status table contains only coarse grained, top-level data. Import phase run times vary a lot (e.g. partition_import often takes 80% of the whole run time), and therefore the log file provides an easier alternative to follow more details of the import:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Import status table contains only coarse grained, top-level data. Import phase run times vary a lot (e.g. `partition_import` often takes 80% of the whole import execution time), and therefore the server log provides an alternative to follow more details of import:
```

  configuration for timestamp and date parsing
---

## COPY: large datasets with out-of-order data

The [`COPY` SQL command](/docs/reference/sql/copy/) is the preferred way to import large (especially out-of-order) CSV files into partitioned tables.
It expects files to reside in directory pointed to by `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting (not set by default), and can be edited as part of the [configuration](https://questdb.io/docs/reference/configuration).

> This location is used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions. It is possible to choose a different temporary storage location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This location is also used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions. It is possible to choose a different temporary storage location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.
```

:::info

> Importing into existing partitioned tables containing data is not yet supported . 

Reviewer 5: Redundant space:
```suggestion
Importing into existing partitioned tables containing data is not yet supported. 
```

:::

### QuestDB configuration

Import expects files to reside in directory pointed to by the `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting (not set by default), and can be edited as part of the [configuration](/docs/reference/configuration).
This location is also used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions. It is possible to choose a different temporary storage location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.

To get best performance, temporary import files (governed by `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting) should be set to the same filesystem as the database data files.
If `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` is not set to the same directory as the database data files, QuestDB has to copy the temporary data files to move partitions instead of changing the file location, and therefore the operations is likely to be slowed down.

See [`COPY` configuration settings](/docs/reference/configuration#bulk-csv-import) for all the configuration options.

## Create the table schema

Once the source data is exported and QuestDB configuration are set, the user can start an import.

> 

Author: 'input file analysis' doesn't create file but once could say that it's created in 'analyze_file_structure' import phase . 
Maybe this would look better : 
'QuestDB analyzes input file, detects schema and creates target table .`

> ## Large datasets with out-of-order data

Reviewer 3: I will move this to the start of the whole page as this is the preferred way?

Author: 👍

COPY sql command is the preferred way to import large (especially unordered) CSV files into partitioned tables.
It expects files to reside in directory pointed to by `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting (empty by default).
This location is used for storing temporary files like indexes or temporary partitions .

> It's possible to choose a different location via  `cairo.sql.copy.work.root` setting.

Reviewer 3: Are there two settings, or should it be:
```suggestion
It's possible to choose a different location via  `cairo.sql.copy.root` setting.
```

Reviewer 3: Pretty sure it should be `cairo.sql.copy.root` based on the configuration page https://questdb.io/docs/reference/configuration.

Author: cairo.sql.copy.work.root is a new setting that allows user to choose different location for temporary import files . 

For example - if user imports from csv on a temporarily attached FS (filesystem) he/she would want to set work.root to some location on the same FS as target database. If work.root is on the same FS astarget database then files can be moved (which is a small metadata change), otherwise files need to be copied (and that might take time for big files).

Reviewer 3: Thanks - updated.

2022-08-03T14:01:42.791789Z I i.q.c.t.CsvFileIndexer finished chunk [chunkLo=11549510915, chunkHi=15399347885, lines=30000011, errors=0]
...
```

While it's running, import can be cancelled with:

```questdb-sql
copy '55020329020b446a' cancel;
```

Within a few seconds import should stop and message with 'cancelled' status should appear in text_import_log, e.g.  

```questdb-sql
select * from sys.text_import_log where id = '55020329020b446a' order by ts desc limit 1
``` 

| ts                          | id               | table   | file        | phase | status    | message                                                    | rows_handled | rows_imported | errors |
|:----------------------------|------------------|---------|-------------|-------|-----------|------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|---------------|--------|
| 2022-08-03T14:04:42.268502Z | 55020329020b446a | weather | weather.csv | null  | cancelled | import cancelled [phase=partition_import, msg=`Cancelled`] | 0            | 0             | 0      |

> 

Reviewer 3: I am migrating this to the COPY page so I think this can go?

For more information on the `/imp` entry point, refer to the
[REST API documentation](/docs/reference/api/rest#imp---import-data).

> ## INSERT: large datasets with out-of-order data (superseded by COPY)  

Reviewer 5: nit: I'd better place an info panel here suggesting users to use COPY instead of the REST API for large O3 files.

Reviewer 3: I will add it to the REST API section.
